Nicholas Joseph Fury is a fictional character portrayed by Samuel L. Jackson in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) media franchise, based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name. Prior to the formation of the MCU, Marvel Comics incorporated Jackson's likeness into the reimagined design of the character for The Ultimates. In the MCU, Fury is initially depicted as a master spy who is the Director of S.H.I.E.L.D.. Fury enacts the Avengers Initiative in response to Loki's invasion of Earth, a plan he previously developed after meeting Carol Danvers and learning of extraterrestrial threats.
Following the fall of S.H.I.E.L.D. and his near fatal encounter with the Winter Soldier, Fury fakes his death and hunts down Hydra cells before assisting the Avengers in their battle against Ultron. Fury falls victim to the Blip, and upon his resurrection dedicates his time to developing the S.A.B.E.R. intergalactic defense space station until being called back to Earth in an effort to thwart the invasion of a rogue group of Skrulls.
As of 2023, Fury has appeared in eleven MCU films, beginning with an appearance in the post-credits scene of Iron Man (2008). He also appeared in two episodes of the television series Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. (2013–14). He stars as the protagonist of the miniseries Secret Invasion (2023); the storyline leading into the film The Marvels (2023), in which he returned.

### Fictional character biography

Early developments
Further information: Captain Marvel (film) and Secret Invasion (miniseries)
Nicholas Joseph Fury was born in Huntsville, Alabama on July 4, 1950. He joined the United States Army after graduating from high school, eventually becoming a Colonel. He later left the army to join the Central Intelligence Agency, where he served as a spy during the Cold War. He was eventually recruited to the covert espionage agency S.H.I.E.L.D.
In 1995, Kree Empire Starforce member Vers crash-lands in Los Angeles, drawing S.H.I.E.L.D. agents Fury and Phil Coulson to investigate. In an ensuing Skrull attack, Fury kills a Skrull impersonating Coulson. Skrull commander Talos, disguised as Fury's boss Keller, orders Fury to work with Vers and keep tabs on her. Vers, escaping capture by the Skrull, uses memories they have extracted to bring Fury to the Project Pegasus installation at a U.S. Air Force base. They discover Vers was Carol Danvers, a pilot presumed to have died in 1989 while testing an experimental jet engine designed by Dr. Wendy Lawson, whom Vers recognizes as a woman from her nightmares. They then encounter Lawson's cat, Goose. Fury then informs S.H.I.E.L.D. of their location and a team led by Talos disguised as Keller arrives. Fury discovers Talos's ruse and helps Danvers escape in a Quadjet with Goose. They fly to Louisiana to meet former pilot Maria Rambeau, the last person to see Danvers and Lawson alive. They also meet her daughter, Monica. Later, Danvers, Talos, Fury, Goose, and Rambeau locate Lawson's cloaked laboratory orbiting Earth, where Lawson hid several Skrulls, including Talos's family, Soren and G'iah, and the Tesseract, the power source of Lawson's engine. Danvers is captured by Starforce, and in the subsequent fight, Fury retrieves Goose, who is revealed to be an alien Flerken. Goose swallows the Tesseract and while on a spaceship over the Mojave Desert, scratches Fury's face, blinding his left eye. Danvers departs to help the Skrulls find a new homeworld, leaving Fury a modified pager to contact her in an emergency. Meanwhile, Fury adopts Goose and drafts an initiative to locate heroes like Danvers, naming it after her Air Force call sign, "Avenger".
In 1997, Fury meets with the Skrulls again on Earth after he and Danvers are unable to find a home for them. He and Talos hold a meeting with Soren, G'iah, and other Skrull refugees including Varra, who introduces him to Gravik. He tells them he and Danvers will keep their promise in finding them a home if they help to protect Earth in the meantime.
In 1998, Fury goes to New York City and meets in a restaurant with Varra, who has assumed the appearance of a human named Priscilla, where she discloses top secret information about the Red Room. At some point thereafter, Fury marries Priscilla.
Later, Fury became the Deputy Chief of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s Bogotá station, where he "proved his leadership mettle" by engineering the rescue of hostages captured by Colombian rebels at the country's embassy, including the daughter of then-S.H.I.E.L.D. Director Alexander Pierce, prompting Pierce to make him director of S.H.I.E.L.D., while Pierce joined the World Security Council.
Assembling the Avengers
Further information: Iron Man (2008 film), Iron Man 2, Thor (film), Captain America: The First Avenger, The Avengers (2012 film), and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. season 1
In 2010, Fury visits Tony Stark in his Malibu home and recruits him into the "Avengers Initiative".
Six months later in 2011, Fury approaches Stark at Randy's Donuts, revealing that Stark's recently acquired new assistant "Natalie Rushman" is S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent Natasha Romanoff and that his father Howard was a S.H.I.E.L.D. founder whom Fury knew personally. Fury explains that Vanko's father Anton and Howard invented the arc reactor together, but when Anton tried to sell it, Howard had him deported. Fury gives Stark some of his father's old material, enabling Stark to synthesize a new element for his arc reactor that ends his palladium dependency. Later, Fury informs Stark that because of his difficult personality, S.H.I.E.L.D. intends to use him only as a consultant.
In 2012, Fury enlists Dr. Erik Selvig to study the Tesseract.
In New York City, he oversees the reintroduction of Steve Rogers into society.
Fury is present with his colleague and friend, Maria Hill, at the S.H.I.E.L.D. facility when Loki arrives to steal the Tesseract and take control of Agent Clint Barton and Selvig. Fury recruits Rogers, and sends Romanoff to recruit Bruce Banner, while Coulson recruits Stark, to help Barton and fight Loki. Later, Fury uses Coulson's death to motivate the Avengers, now including Thor, to work as a team, leading to their stand against Loki and the invading Chitauri army in New York City. When the World Security Council authorizes the nuclear bombing of the city to defeat the invasion, Fury uses a rocket launcher to take out one of the two jets launching for that mission, but is too late to stop the second, which fires a missile that is intercepted by Stark.
After Loki's defeat, Fury authorizes the use of alien technology to resurrect Coulson from death and, in response to the invasion, convinces the Council that the world needs "a quantum surge in threat analysis".
Fighting Hydra and Ultron
Further information: Captain America: The Winter Soldier, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. season 1, Avengers: Age of Ultron, and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. season 2
In 2014, Fury trains Rogers to be a S.H.I.E.L.D. agent and proposes Project Insight: three S.H.I.E.L.D. Helicarriers armed with spy satellite guided guns, designed to preemptively eliminate threats. The Helicarriers are capable of continuous suborbital flight, due to new Repulsor engines proposed by Stark, their guns can kill 1,000 targets per minute, and the satellites, launched from the Lemurian Star, a S.H.I.E.L.D. vessel, can read a target's DNA anywhere in the world. However, when the project is a few weeks away from completion, Fury grows suspicious about Insight. He hires an Algerian mercenary, Georges Batroc, to hijack the Star as cover to allow Romanoff onto the ship with Rogers to retrieve data regarding Insight. Though Romanoff is successful, Fury is unable to decrypt the data, increasing his suspicions and forcing him to convince Pierce to delay the project. Shortly afterwards, an attempt is made on Fury's life by Hydra, which is revealed to have taken over S.H.I.E.L.D. Fury is apparently killed by their most dangerous assassin, the Winter Soldier, but he is revealed to have faked his death using Tetrodotoxin B, a drug designed by Banner that was capable of slowing down the heart to 1 beat per minute. Rogers, Sam Wilson, and Romanoff are taken by Hill to see him alive and in a hidden bunker. After it is revealed that Pierce is working for Hydra, Fury reappears to override Hydra's control of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s computer systems, forcing Pierce to unlock S.H.I.E.L.D's database so Romanoff can leak classified information, exposing Hydra to the public. Fury reveals that although Pierce had deleted Fury's retinal scan from the system, Fury had a backup scan of his destroyed other eye. He then tells Rogers, Wilson, and Romanoff that he is to go into hiding in Europe to hunt down more Hydra cells.
Once Hydra's plan to control the world is foiled, Fury appears to assist S.H.I.E.L.D. agents in the aftermath of those events, rescuing agents Leo Fitz and Jemma Simmons from drowning in the ocean and providing Agent Coulson with the Destroyer gun to take out enemy soldiers, before they confront John Garrett and Deathlok. In the aftermath, Coulson vaporizes Garrett and criticizes Fury for using GH325 to revive him. Fury responds that he values Coulson as much as any Avenger, because he represents the heart and moral center of S.H.I.E.L.D., and declares Coulson the new director of S.H.I.E.L.D., tasking him with rebuilding the organization from scratch, and equips him with a 'toolbox' containing useful data.
In 2015, Fury arrives at Barton's home in Iowa to help and motivate Stark, Rogers, Romanoff, Banner, and Barton to formulate a plan to stop Ultron. He, Hill, and other former agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., and James Rhodes use the original helicarrier to help the Avengers in Sokovia during the final battle against Ultron. Afterwards, he oversees the Avengers transition into the new Avengers Compound.
Coulson subsequently reveals to Gonzalez and his board that he and Fury had discovered that the original helicarrier survived HYDRA's attack and repaired it as a failsafe in case of an emergency.
Aftermath of the Infinity War
Further information: Avengers: Infinity War, Avengers: Endgame, and Spider-Man: Far From Home
In 2018, Fury and Hill are travelling in Atlanta discussing the Avengers' whereabouts when Hill suddenly disintegrates due to the Blip, prompting Fury to use his pager to summon Danvers, before he too disintegrates.
In 2023, Fury is restored to life and attends Stark's funeral, reuniting with Danvers.
Fury is then tasked by the United States government to lead S.A.B.E.R., an organization focused on protecting Earth from extraterrestrial threats, and run the space station.[a] He then appoints Talos and Soren to impersonate him and Hill.
In 2024, Fury is informed by Talos via phone call that Peter Parker received Tony Stark's glasses. Talos then asked Fury to come back to Earth, as people were beginning to ask what happened to the Avengers. Still in space, Fury disconnects the call.
Secret Invasion
Further information: Secret Invasion (miniseries)
In 2026, Fury, who is suffering from PTSD due to the Blip, is called by Hill to come back to Earth due to a Skrull invasion. He is picked up by Hill and taken to a safe house in Russia, where he reunites with Talos. He is updated on the threat that Gravik poses and leaves for a walk, and is captured by MI6 agents, and taken to Sonya Falsworth's residence. She informs him he is not up for the fight and that she will not partner with him. Fury places a bug in her office and returns to the safe house, where he, Hill, and Talos learn more information. They learn from G'iah (who has fallen in with Gravik's organization) of a planned attack on Unity Day in Moscow and infiltrate to stop the bombings, only to be tricked by Gravik, who taunts Fury and shapeshifts into him and shoots Hill.
Fury is taken away from the scene by Talos and they take a train to Warsaw, Poland. Fury learns that Talos summoned the million remaining Skrulls to Earth which frustrates him and he dismisses Talos. He goes to London and calls Rhodes, asking to meet with him. Unbeknownst to Fury, Rhodes has been abducted by Gravik and replaced by a Skrull agent named Raava. They meet in a tavern and Fury defends himself for being at the attack site and tells Raava of the Skrull invasion. In-character as "Rhodes", Raava refuses to believe him after Fury refuses to call the Avengers for help, and has him discharged. Fury leaves, finds his hidden vehicle, and reunites with Varra at her house.
Fury asks her if she has had any contact with Gravik, but she declines to answer. Instead she asks for apologies after having left her once he returned in the Blip. Fury leaves the house and seeks out Talos, asking him for his help again. They learn from G'iah that Gravik has had some of his men infiltrate a British Royal Navy submarine with the intention of firing a missile at a plane transporting a United Nations delegation. Obtaining the identity and location of the submarine's commander from Falsworth, Fury and Talos successfully infiltrate the commander's residence, kill the Skrull impersonating the commander, and are able to stop the missile attack with G'iah's help.
Through a bug planted in Varra's phone, Fury learns about "Rhodes" being a Skrull, and eavesdrops as Raava gives Varra orders to kill Fury or be killed herself. He sits down with Varra, acknowledges his mistake in neglecting his responsibilities as Varra's husband. After quoting Raymond Carver's "Late Fragment" to one another, they each shoot at the wall behind the other, before Fury leaves. Reconvening with Talos, Fury infiltrates Raava's hotel suite and tricks her into drinking a bottle of expensive bourbon containing a liquid tracker. This enables Fury and Talos to follow her, and stumble upon Gravik and his men carrying out an attack on President Ritson's motorcade. Fury and Talos stop the attack and successfully rescue Ritson, but Talos is shot in the shoulder by Pagon and subsequently stabbed to death by Gravik.
Fury gets Ritson to a hospital and confronts Raava, who reveals that she has leaked footage of Hill's death, placing Fury on a global watchlist. Fury later meets with G'iah, who reveals Gravik is looking for the "Harvest". Gravik calls Fury, offering to call off a planned airstrike on New Skrullos if he brings him the "Harvest" in person. In Finland, Fury leads Falsworth to a grave marked with his name which contains the "Harvest": a collection of DNA from the superheroes who fought during the Battle of Earth. Fury passes the Harvest off to G'iah, who assumes Fury's appearance to confront and kill Gravik to avenge her parents' deaths along with Maria Hill's. Meanwhile, Fury and Falsworth infiltrate Ritson's hospital and kill Raava in front of Ritson, encouraging him to call off the aistrike. In the fallout of the invasion, Ritson declares all extraterrestrial beings on Earth as "enemy combatants", encouraging a wave of vigilantism against people suspected of being Skrulls. After telling Ritson off, Fury asks Varra to come to S.A.B.E.R. with him to help negotiate a peace summit with the Kree. She agrees and they leave Earth together.
Meeting Kamala Khan
Further information: The Marvels
Sometime afterwards, Fury learns of a jump point anomaly near the space station and gets in contact with Danvers, while dispatching Monica Rambeau, who he had recruited following her involvement in the Westview Anomaly, to investigate it. However, Rambeau gets switched with Kamala Khan, who introduces herself to a confused Fury.
After Rambeau is returned to the station, Fury and her return to Earth to the Khan residence in Jersey City, New Jersey, where Fury is reunited with Goose. They speak with Khan, but when she tries demonstrating her powers, she is switched with Danvers. Fury then prompts Rambeau to save Khan from falling in the sky.
Fury takes Goose, Khan's mother Muneeba, father Yusuf, and brother Aamir, to the space station. When the station is attacked by Dar-Benn, Fury sees that Goose has gave birth to Flerken kittens and uses them to safely evacuate the S.A.B.E.R. agents. He, Goose, and the Khans evacuate in an escape pod but are blasted by Dar-Benn's unstable jump point and crash land in New York City. They are shortly met by Khan, who informs them that Rambeau became trapped in another universe.